Spack Enzyme build (#1412)
LLNL/serac: src/docs/sphinx/dev_guide/tpl_build.rst

.. ## Copyright (c) Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC and
.. ## other Serac Project Developers. See the top-level COPYRIGHT file for details.
.. ##
.. ## SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-3-Clause)

.. _tpl_builds-label:

===============================
Third-party Library (TPL) Build
===============================

-----------------
Spack and Uberenv
-----------------

Serac uses `Spack <https://github.com/spack/spack>`_ to build it's TPLs.
This has been encapsulated using `Uberenv <https://github.com/LLNL/uberenv>`_.
Uberenv helps by doing the following:

* Pulls a blessed version of Spack locally
* If you are on a known operating system (like TOSS4), we have defined Spack configuration files
  to keep Spack from building the world

> * Installs our Spack packages into the local Spack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Installs our Spack packages into the local Spack Environment
```

    # Set clang-19 as the default clang
    sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/clang++ clang++ /usr/bin/clang++-19 101 \
    && sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/clang clang /usr/bin/clang-19 101 \
    && sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/clang-format clang-format /usr/bin/clang-format-19 101

Install required build packages to minimize what Spack will build:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo apt install -y --no-install-recommends build-essential bzip2 cmake libopenblas-dev \
    lua5.2 liblua5.2-dev openmpi-bin libopenmpi-dev unzip

Optionally you can install packages to generate documentation:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo apt install -y --no-install-recommends graphviz python3-sphinx texlive-full doxygen

.. note::

    The documentation packages require a lot of disk space.

.. note::

    We provide a basic Ubuntu 24 Spack environment file in ``scripts/spack/configs/linux_ubuntu_24`` that
    may work for most people. If you want to try using that, skip to :ref:`building_tpls-label`
    below and use this command line option instead ``--spack-env-file=scripts/spack/configs/linux_ubuntu_24/spack.yaml``

macOS
^^^^^

.. warning::

>    These instructions are in development, but have been tested for M2 MacBooks. They also need to be tested with Enzyme.

Reviewer: made a followup issue for that, i can start that after this pr https://github.com/LLNL/serac/issues/1435

Author: #1440

.. code-block:: bash

   $ brew install cppcheck doxygen
   $ ln -s /opt/homebrew/opt/llvm@19/bin/clang-format /opt/homebrew/bin/clang-format

If you have installed Homebrew using the default installation prefix, most packages will be accessible through the prefix ``/opt/homebrew``.
Note for Intel-based Macs, the installation prefix is ``/usr/local``. If you set a custom prefix or aren't sure what the prefix is, run ``brew --prefix``.
For the rest of this section, we will assume the prefix is ``/opt/homebrew``.
Some packages are not linked into this prefix to prevent conflicts with MacOS-provided versions.
These will only be accessible via the prefix ``/opt/homebrew/opt/[package-name]``.
Homebrew will warn about such packages after installing them.

In order for the correct compilers to be used for the installation, you should also add the bin directory for LLVM clang to your path in your ``.bash_profile``, ``.bashrc``, or ``.zshrc``, etc.
This is also useful for a few additional packages:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ export PATH="/opt/homebrew/opt/llvm@19/bin:/opt/homebrew/opt/m4/bin:/opt/homebrew/opt/gnu-sed/libexec/gnubin:$PATH"

.. note::

>     We provide a basic Ubuntu 24 Spack environment file in ``scripts/spack/configs/linux_ubuntu_24`` that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    We provide a basic MacOS Spack environment file that
```

    may work for most people. If you want to try using that, skip to :ref:`building_tpls-label`
    below and use this command line option instead ``--spack-env-file=scripts/spack/configs/macos_sonoma_aarch64/spack.yaml``. You will likely
    need to update the versions of packages to match the versions installed by Homebrew. The versions for all installed packages can be listed via
    the command ``brew list --versions``.

.. note::
    The invocation of ``uberenv.py`` is slightly modified from the standard instructions below
    in order to force the use of the Homebrew-installed MPI and compilers. The spec command line option
    should be ``--spec="^openmpi@5 %clang@19"`` and to build with devtools and profiling enabled,
    change the spec to ``"+devtools+profiling ^openmpi@5 %clang@19"``

> Optionally, you can install the developer tools via ```pip``. This step is only required if you wish to use Serac's developer tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optionally, you can install the developer tools via ``pip``. This step is only required if you wish to use Serac's developer tools.
```

In order to use Python devtools, you will need to create a Python venv. This is much more reliable than having Spack install 20+ Python packages.
In this example, we are using the builtin Python in ``/usr/bin``, but it is possible to use a version installed from Homebrew or elsewhere.

Next, you will need to install wheel and Sphinx:

.. code-block:: bash

   python3 -m venv --system-site-packages venv
   source venv/bin/activate
   pip install wheel

>    pip install sphinx

Reviewer: Originally, this section also had

```
   git clone git@github.com:LLNL/ATS.git --branch 7.0.105
   pip install ATS/
```

But I guess a user isn't going to run integration tests, especially now that they're disabled, so it's probably OK to leave out.

Author: I figured we would put it back in when we re-enable integration tests.

  On LC machines, it is good practice to do the build step in parallel on a compute node.
  You should add the following to the start of your commands: ``salloc -ppdebug -N1 --exclusive python3 scripts/uberenv/uberenv.py``

-------------------------------
Generate Spack Environment File
-------------------------------

Spack uses an environment file, or ``spack.yaml``, to describe where system level packages are to minimize what it builds.
This file describes the compilers and associated flags required for the platform as well as the low-level libraries
on the system to prevent Spack from building the world. Documentation on these environment files is located
in the `Spack docs <https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/environments.html>`_.

The following command will download the specific Spack version we use and run a minimal set of commands to
generate an environment file for you. This should be a good starting point and should be used in following
Spack builds.

.. code-block:: bash

    ./scripts/uberenv/uberenv.py --prefix=<path/outside/repository> --setup-and-env-only

This command will create a Spack environment file, ``spack.yaml``, where you ran the above command.

> If you want to use Clang as your compiler. Alter the following section in that file, by changing

Reviewer: sorry for being grammar police

```suggestion
If you want to use Clang as your compiler, alter the following section in that file by changing
```

     -   xts3eqq          ^fmt@11.0.2 cflags=-fPIC cxxflags=-fPIC fflags=-fPIC ~ipo+pic~shared build_system=cmake build_type=Release cxxstd=11 generator=make arch=linux-ubuntu24.04-skylake %clang@19.1.1

Lines starting with ``[e]`` are external packages that Spack recognizes are on the system and will not rebuild them.
By adding Lua to the Spack environment file, Spack will no longer build Lua and any of its dependencies that are
needed by anything else. In this case, ``lua``, ``readline``, and ``unzip`` will not be built. ``unzip`` may be needed
by another package, so you can also add it with this yaml section:

.. code-block:: yaml

    unzip:
      externals:
      - spec: unzip@6.0
        prefix: /usr
      buildable: false

.. important::

    Uberenv will override existing ``spack.yaml`` files in the current working directory. Now that we have made modifications,

>     you should rename or move the file so they are not lost. For the rest of instruction, we will assume you renamed the file to

Reviewer: the last sentence is a bit confusing, since the file `ubuntu24.yaml` is only mentioned once in an above section (page search "You can use these directly in the")

    ``ubuntu24.yaml``.

.. _building_tpls-label:

--------------------------------------
Building Serac's Third-party Libraries
--------------------------------------

It is now time to build Serac's Third-party Libraries (TPLs). Run the command with the compiler
that you want to develop with:

.. code-block:: bash

    scripts/uberenv/uberenv.py --prefix=<path/outside/repository> --spack-env-file=<path/to/spack.yaml> --spec="%clang@=19.1.1"

Some helpful uberenv options include :

> * ``--spec=" build_type=Debug"`` (build the MFEM and Hypre libraries with debug symbols)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``--spec=" build_type=Debug"`` (build important TPLs such as Axom, MFEM, and Hypre with debug symbols)
```

Author: instead of important.. maybe core?
